Hey, guys.
Welcome to lecture 20.
So, what we're gonna learn
about here is data alignment.
All right, so
we're gonna learn about arithmetic between
data frames with different index values.
Start off as always.
Import numpy as np.
Import pandas as pd.
And then from pandas import
Series and DataFrame.
Okay.
So let's go ahead and
start by making two series.
First one will just pass a list, 0, 1, 2.
And then we'll make the index.
letters.
Oops.
We'll have to pass a list of letters for
brackets.
There we go.
A, B, C.
And let's go ahead and show that.
All right, so we have 0,
1, 2, index A, B, C.
Let's go ahead and make the second one.
We'll call series and
we'll call 3, 4, 5, 6.
So it's going to be one longer than
that the first series we made,
and the index, we'll pass A, B, C, D.
Now let's go ahead and show that,
just to see what it looks like.
All right 3, 4, 5, 6, A, B, C, D.
Awesome.
So what's going to happen
when we add these together?
Let's go ahead and find out.
So ser1 plus ser2.
So let's take a look at what happened.
Pandas added up the values
where the index matched.
So A in the first series was 0,
A in the second series was 3.
So 0 plus 3 is 3.
What it wasn't able to do is add where
series one didn't have
an index value matching.
Series two had a value of 6 at D, but
since series one didn't have a D index,
it's gonna replace it with a null.
So the null values will be
added automatically if you
don't have a matching
index in both series.
So let's see what's going to happen with
data frames if we try something similar.
So I'll make D frame one
my first data frame.
And we'll pass np.arrange.
We'll have it be four long and
we're going to reshape this
into a two by two matrix.
We'll make columns.
An interesting way to do
this is we can call list,
which is a python function and
we can put in AB as a string.
And what list is gonna do is it's
gonna make a list out of A and B, so
the columns are just gonna be A and B.
This is just a little trick we can
use in the future to save some time.
And then index,
I'll just use cities again.
Oops, LA.
All right.
And then let's go ahead and take a look
at what that data frame looks like.
Whoops.
So I accidentally forgot a non-keyword
argument after a keyword,
and that is the equal sign here.
So we forgot to say index equals.
Now let's see if it works, and it does.
Awesome.
So I have my data frame, 0, 1, 2, 3.
This got reshaped to a two by two matrix.
And the cities are the index and
the letters are the column values.
Let's make a second data
frame in a similar fashion.
In this case,
I'm going to make a nine point array,
and reshape this into, you've probably
guessed it already, a three by three.
We'll have the columns.
We'll use our little list
function trick again.
And in this case, we're going to need two,
so I'm going to say ADC.
I'm skipping B on purpose so
we can see its effects later.
And then index will equal NYC,
SF, and LA,
since that was in the last one.
And notice something I was
accidentally doing here.
I accidentally dragged this parentheses.
You can see the IPython will highlight
which one it's matched up to.
So I'm going to delete it here and
bring it back down to reshape.
Awesome.
And then let's go ahead and
see what that looks like.
Cool, so now we have our three by three A,
D, C column deep data frame.
So what happens when you
add dframe1 To dframe2?
Take a moment, pause the video.
See if you can guess at
what's gonna happen.
Look back and
see what happened to the series and
try to think of what's gonna happen when
we add these two data frames together.
All right, let's take a look.
So the only two that I was
able to successfully add
was the A column for
the values LA and NYC.
That's because those were the only
two where the row index and
the column matched up.
The rest of them had null values.
So, what if we wanted to
replace the null values?
What could we do?
Well, we can call our dframe1.
Take a quick gander at what it looks like.
And then say deframe1, we can use add.
So this is a,
we can call add to it instead of adding
to it directly with that plus sign.
So we'll say add.
First thing we're going to do is,
what are we going to add to this deframe?
I'm sorry, deframe1.
Well, we can add deframe2 to it.
And then another argument that
we can pass are the fill values.
So I'll put fill_value,
you've seen this before in the past, as 0.
So what's going to happen now
is something a little different.
You can see we only have one null
value now and that was the B for SF.
So, if we look at dframe2,
I'll just type it out again.
For instance, B of LA or
LAB was a 3 value in dframe1.
And there was not B column here.
So previously that would have resulted in
a null, but since we had our fill value be
0, it filled in zeros for the data frame,
the second data frames value.
So then,
it kept the original dframe1 value.
So, BLA was 3 and
now BLA is 3 in this added data frame.
So this is going to be a really important
tool if you're gonna be adding different
size data frames but don't want to
lose all your data to null values.
You can just select fill
values to be zero, and
it will use the original values of
the dframe1, unless there is a value.
So what about operations between
a series and the data frame?
So we see what the second
data frame there looks like.
Let's go ahead and
create a new series we'll call it ser3.
And we're just gonna make it
from the second dataframe's
0th row, and I can do that
just by calling it like that.
And let's take a look at
what it actually looks like.
So here's dframe2.
That was a zero throw so
the NYC row I made a series out of it,
0, 1, 2, and
its index are the column names, A, D, C.
So, we can use arithmetic on it,
just some operations.
So we can say something like dframe2
minus that third series we just made.
And that will just work
perfectly since there's values
for every column in that NYC row.
So it's going to subtract
it completely from dframe2.
Alright.
So up next, we're gonna learn
about sorting and ranking.
I'll see you there.